In this video, we will talk about calorimeters.
In this video, we will consider two calorimeters:
electromagnetic calorimeter and hadron Calorimeter.
Calorimeters are located after the tracking system and RICH detector,
because they stop all particles except muons.
Electromagnetic calorimeter stops electrons and photons.
All other particles fly further to the hadron Calorimeter.
Hadron calorimeters stops protons,
neutrons, and other particles containing quarks.
In all high energy physics experiments,
hadron calorimeters stands after the electromagnetic one.
There are only muon chambers are after
the hadron calorimeter due to muons pass all detector systems.
The calorimeters measure particle energies.
They are based on similar principles but have
differences in physics, processes, and composition.
Let's consider each of these calorimeters more detailed.
So, the calorimeter system is designed to measure particle energy.
Particles interact with much matter of calorimeter and lose their energy.
The calorimeter measures how much energy the particles lose before they stop.
Let's start from the electromagnetic calorimeter.
The electromagnetic calorimeter is responsible for
measuring the energy of electrons and photons.
Consider how the electromagnetic calorimeter works.
Suppose an electron flies into the calorimeter.
Interacting with a matter,
the electron emits a photon and change its own direction losing some energy.
After this first step
we have two particles
and sum of the energies is equal to the energy of the original electron.
At the second step,
the photon interacts with the matter and decays into an electron and a positron.
In the same time,
the electron again emits other photon,
and again, changes its own direction and to lose energy.
So, there are four particles and energy of
the origin electron is distributed on these particles.
In other words, with each step,
the number of particles increases and energy of each of these particles decreases.
This process repeats a lot of times and creates an electromagnetic shower.
During this process, the number of particles exponentially
increases and sum of their energies is equal to the energy of the origin electron.
So, energy of particles in the shower exponentially drops with each step of the process.
Moreover, each step takes in average the same distance in the material of the detector.
And as a result, particle energy in
the electromagnetic shower exponentially drops with lengths of the shower.
Let's formalize this.
So, energy of a particle in
the electromagnetic shower exponentially drops with its coordinates in
the shower and proportional to
the starting energy E_0 for the origin particle as it's shown on the slide.
In this equation, X_0 represents
average size of one step of the electromagnetic shower production.
This value depends on material used in the calorimeter.
The more dense material
the smaller this value.
This equation allows to estimate the shower size
and number of particles in it. Let's consider that.
Electromagnetic shower grows while the energy of
the particles in the shower is above the critical value E_c.
The shower size X_max can be estimated as it's shown on the slide.
The critical energy E_c as well as X_0
in the equation are defined by the material of the calorimeter,
and width of the calorimeter is selected to be larger than length of the shower.
The total number of particles in the shower is estimated as follow.
It's proportional to the energy of the region particle E_0
and inversely depends on the critical energy E_c.
Measuring the number of particles allows
to determine the energy of the incoming particle.
This number is measured by scintillation counters.
Their signal is proportional to the number of particles flies through the counters.
Consider composition of the electromagnetic calorimeters.
In the high energy physics experiments,
electromagnetic calorimeters consist of a lot of crystals shown on the slide.
The crystal creates an electromagnetic shower,
and lengths of these crystals is selected to be larger than expected size of the shower.
The crystals are transparent because a lot of particles in the shower are photons.
Also, there is the scintillation counter after the crystal.
It counts the number of particles in the shower.
This number depends on the incoming particle energy,
and this dependence is estimated during the calorimeter calibration process.
In the LHCb detector,
a lot of these crystals are collected in the metrics as it's shown on the slide.
In the LHCb detector model,
the electromagnetic calorimeter responses are represented as blue colors.
One particle can activate several crystals
of the calorimeter.
Thus, it's needed to recognize a crystal cluster
corresponds to the particle to estimate the particle energy more precisely.
To do this, a particle track estimated in
the tracking system is extrapolated to the electromagnetic calorimeter.
Then, crystals close to the track in the calorimeter are grouped into a cluster.
And sum of energies measured in
all crystals of the cluster corresponds to the particle energy.
Machine learning approaches can be used to recognize
these clusters and estimate the particle energy more accurate.
Moreover, photons also create clusters in the calorimeter,
but they have no hits in the tracking system and their tracks are not recognized.
So, machine learning can be used to recognize clusters for
photons and separate them from clusters for electrons or just noise clusters.
So, electromagnetic calorimeters are also responsible for photons detection.
Consider how calorimeters help to identify particle types.
The equation of the slide represents the connection between energy,
momentum, and mass of a particle.
We already know that the particle energy is measured by calorimeters.
In the previous videos,
we see that momentum of the particle is measured by tracking systems.
So, using this equation,
we can estimate the particle mass and as a result it's type.
However, in the next videos we will see how to use information from
all detector systems to identify particle types more accurate.
Now, let's talk about the Hadron Calorimeter.
As it was told in the beginning of this video,
electromagnetic calorimeter stops electrons and
photons. Other particles fly further to the hadron calorimeter,
and hadron calorimeter stops protons,
neutrons, and other particles containing quarks.
In high energy physics experiments,
hadron calorimeters stands after the electromagnetic calorimeter.
There are only muon chambers after the hadron calorimeter
due to muons pass all detector systems.
The hadron calorimeter is responsible for measuring the energy of protons,
neutrons, and other particles containing quarks.
The principle of the hadron calorimeter work
is similar to the electromagnetic calorimeter one.
But the incoming particle produces a hadronic shower instead of
the electromagnetic shower due to interactions with the nuclei of matter atoms.
The shower consists of large number of different particle types,
not only electrons and photons.
Number of particles in the shower exponentially increases with lengths of the shower.
In the same time,
energy of each particle in the shower
exponentially drops as well as for the electromagnetic showers.
Hadron showers are larger than the electromagnetic one,
so the hadron calorimeter consists of several layers.
Each layer has a layer of matter that creates
a hadronic shower and
this scintillation counter layer that counts number of particles in the shower.
Unlike electromagnetic calorimeters, hadron calorimeters
use heavy materials such as metals.
In the LHCb detector model,
the hadron calorimeter responses are represented as orange cells.
Similarly to the electromagnetic calorimeter,
one particle can activate several cells of the calorimeters, thus,
it's needed to recognize a cluster of cells
corresponds to the particle to estimate the particle energy more precisely.
To do this, a particle track estimated in
the tracking system is extrapolated to the hadron calorimeter.
Then, cells close to the track in the calorimeter are grouped into a cluster,
and sum of energies measured in
all cells of the cluster corresponds to the particle energy.
Again, machine learning approaches can be used to recognize
these clusters and estimate the particle energy more accurate.
This is all about the calorimeters,
and in the next video,
we'll talk about the last system of the detector.